Source: https://vcahospitals.com/know-your-pet/preventive-health-care-guidelines-for-dogs

There is an old adage that can be directly applied to canine health care: “An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure”. Avoiding an illness is always better than treating it, and when it cannot be avoided, intervention is always more effective if it starts sooner rather than later.

Since dogs age faster than humans, an annual veterinary exam with diagnostic testing is equivalent to a human visiting the doctor every four to five years. Dogs’ rapid aging process makes preventive health care even more important.

What are preventative healthcare guidelines?
To standardize veterinary care for dogs and cats, the American Animal Hospital Association (AAHA) and the American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) gathered medical information from various specialty groups, such as the American Heartworm Society and the Companion Animal Parasite Council. From these consultations, they devised the “Canine Preventive Healthcare Guidelines” (CPHG).

What are the CPHG recommendations and why are they important?
Below is an overview of some recommendations included in the CPHG and how they relate to you and your dog:

History. A discussion of your dog’s home life will give your veterinarian an overall idea of his health status. Changes in your dog’s demeanor may occur so gradually that you are not aware of them until you are asked specific questions. Does your dog have a good appetite and regular bowel movements? Does he strain to urinate? Does he limp? Is he slow to rise when lying down? Does he ever cough, sneeze, or seem short of breath? Is he itchy? Does he drink a lot? Your answers will be recorded at each visit so your veterinarian can identify changes that are otherwise difficult to notice day-to-day.

Examinations. Even healthy dogs should be examined by a veterinarian at least once a year, and preferably twice a year. If your dog is older or has a pre-existing health problem, more frequent visits may be necessary. Physical exams can detect enlarged lymph nodes, skin tumors, heart murmurs or skipped heartbeats, and abdominal tumors. They will identify enlarged or shrunken kidneys, liver, or spleen that may indicate systemic disease. A look at the eyes can determine your dog’s visual capacity. An orthopedic evaluation can indicate whether your dog is arthritic and in need of pain medication. A dermatologic evaluation of the skin and coat can determine the need for flea and tick control or diagnose skin infections (bacterial, fungal, or parasitic). Hair loss may indicate systemic disease or hormonal imbalances.

Testing. Although heartworms are more prevalent in warmer climates where mosquitoes thrive, infected dogs live in every state and in many parts of Canada. Even dogs in cold environments can get heartworms, so the American Heartworm Society advises annual heartworm blood testing. Intestinal parasites can affect both dogs and humans, so a stool sample should be analyzed at least once a year, and preferably twice. To diagnose organ malfunctions in the early stages, blood tests should be performed annually (complete blood count, chemistry panel, and thyroid screen), as well as urinalysis. If problems are diagnosed, more frequent testing may be necessary. For dogs in areas where ticks are prevalent, screening for vector-borne diseases like Lyme disease or ehrlichiosis may be advised.

Dental Care. It is well known that oral health impacts a dog’s general health. Dogs with clean mouths live longer. The bacteria involved in periodontal disease do not just stay in the mouth; they invade the bloodstream and travel to major organs like the kidneys, liver, and heart, where they cause significant health issues. Dogs may need their teeth cleaned every one to two years, although this frequency can vary depending on several factors, including preventive care and routine maintenance at home. Dental radiographs (X-rays) will help determine the status of oral disease. Regular dental assessments and treatments will keep your dog’s oral health in good condition.

Parasite Prevention. Dogs should be given medication to prevent heartworms all year long in endemic areas. Many heartworm medications also prevent or treat intestinal parasites, and some may also treat fleas and ticks. Your veterinarian can provide these medications and tailor a parasite prevention protocol to your dog.

Immunizations. Vaccines are divided into two groups: core and non-core (optional) vaccines. All dogs considered stable and healthy to vaccinate should be immunized against rabies, distemper, canine parvovirus, canine adenovirus-2 (hepatitis) (usually offered as a combined DAP vaccination), and leptospirosis. Vaccination for kennel cough, Lyme disease, and canine influenza may be recommended for dogs with potential exposure to these diseases.

Weight Maintenance. Research shows that leaner dogs live longer and have fewer health problems. Your veterinarian will assign a body condition score to your dog and give you dietary and exercise recommendations to help your dog achieve or maintain a healthy body condition score.

Spaying/Neutering. Spaying or neutering can have numerous health and behavior benefits. These procedures help to prevent infections and some types of cancer. Your veterinarian will discuss these benefits and the timing of the surgery for your dog.

Diagnosing Canine Illnesses. Dogs have innate survival instincts that allow them to hide pain and illness well (so as not to seem vulnerable to predators). Since a veterinarian cannot simply ask your dog how she is feeling or see what is going on inside his body, they must use other means. Thorough physical examinations and disease screening tests, such as blood work and urinalysis, can help your veterinarian determine if your dog is at risk of developing a condition that can be prevented or, if a condition is already there, diagnose and treat it early.